Depression
Learn about depression, its symptoms and possible causes, and how you can access treatment and support. Find tips on caring for yourself, and guidance for friends and family.

What is depression?
Depression is a mental health problem that involves having a low mood or losing interest and enjoyment in things. It can also cause a range of other changes to how you feel or behave.

The symptoms you experience may vary. How intense they are, how long they last, and how much they affect your daily life can also vary.

If you experience milder depression, you might have low mood but still be able to carry on with your daily life. But things may feel harder and less worthwhile.

If you have more severe depression, you might find day-to-day life much more difficult. You may also experience suicidal feelings.

It starts as sadness then I feel myself shutting down, becoming less capable of coping. Eventually, I just feel numb and empty.

When does low mood become depression?
We all have times when our mood is low, and we feel sad or fed up. Often these feelings happen for a reason and pass on their own.

But it might be depression if the feelings become so bad that they interfere with our daily life. Or if they last for several weeks or months.

Are there different types of depression?
If you're diagnosed with depression, you might also be told that it is ‘less severe’ or ‘more severe’. This describes how your symptoms are affecting you, and what treatment you're likely to be offered. You may find that the severity of your depression changes over time.

Sometimes you might hear depression being called ‘major depressive disorder’. There are some other types of depression too:

Persistent depressive disorder (PDD). PDD is continuous depression that lasts for two years or more. You may also hear it called dysthymia or chronic depression.
Seasonal affective disorder (SAD). SAD is depression that occurs at a particular time of year, or during a particular season. See our page on SAD for more information.
Antenatal depression. This is depression that occurs while you are pregnant. It is sometimes called prenatal depression.
Postnatal depression (PND). This is depression that occurs in the first year after having a baby. This can include affecting dads and partners.
Premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD). This is a hormone-related disorder that affects your body but also how you feel. This can involve experiencing depression. So your doctor may describe this as a mental health problem.


Common signs and symptoms of depression
These are some common signs of depression that you may experience:

How you might feel
Down, upset or tearful
Restless, agitated or irritable
Guilty, worthless and down on yourself
Empty and numb
Isolated and unable to relate to other people
Finding no pleasure in life or things you usually enjoy
Angry or frustrated over minor things
A sense of unreality
No self-confidence or self-esteem
Hopeless and despairing
Feeling tired all the time
How you might act
Avoiding social events and activities you usually enjoy
Self-harming or suicidal behaviour
Difficulty speaking, thinking clearly or making decisions
Losing interest in sex
Difficulty remembering or concentrating on things
Using more tobacco, alcohol or other drugs than usual
Difficulty sleeping, or sleeping too much
No appetite and losing weight, or eating more than usual and gaining weight
Physical aches and pains with no obvious physical cause
Moving very slowly, or being restless and agitated
It felt like I was really tired, all the time. I had no energy or emotion about anything.

Anxiety
It's very common to experience depression and anxiety together. Some symptoms of depression can also be symptoms of anxiety, for example:

Feeling restless
Finding it difficult to concentrate
Struggling to sleep

I flit between states of anxiety and depression. At times, each seems to fuel the other.

Self-harm and suicidal feelings
If you're feeling low, you might self-harm to cope with difficult feelings. Although this might make you feel better in the short term, self-harm can be very dangerous.

When you're feeling really low and hopeless, you may also find yourself thinking about suicide. This could be thinking about the idea of suicide, or considering a plan to end your life. These thoughts can feel difficult to control, and can be very frightening.

Psychotic symptoms
If you experience depression, you might also experience some psychotic symptoms. These may include delusions, such as paranoia. Or they may be hallucinations, such as hearing voices.

If you experience psychotic symptoms as part of depression, they're likely to be linked to your depressed thoughts and feelings. This may include experiencing delusions relating to feelings of guilt. For example, you might become convinced that you've committed a crime.

These kinds of experiences can feel very real at the time. This might make it hard to understand that these experiences are also symptoms of your depression. And they can be frightening or upsetting, so it's important to seek treatment and support.

You might worry that experiencing psychotic symptoms could mean you’re given a diagnosis that doesn’t feel right for you. But discussing all of your symptoms with your doctor can help you get the right support and treatment.

How might depression affect my day-to-day life?
If you have depression, you might find that it interferes with different aspects of your life. For example, it might affect your ability to work, your relationships, or managing your finances. This can add extra stress to an already difficult experience.

It may also feel hard to explain your thoughts and feelings to others. You might want to cut yourself off from other people instead. This could lead to you feeling isolated and lonely.

It feels like I'm stuck under a huge grey-black cloud. It's dark and isolating, smothering me at every opportunity.

Can depression be a symptom of other mental health problems?
Symptoms of depression can also be part of other mental health problems, such as:

Bipolar disorder
Borderline personality disorder (BPD) and other personality disorders
Schizoaffective disorder

If you experience low mood or suicidal thoughts, this might be the reason you first speak to your doctor about your mental health. And your doctor might offer you treatment for depression without realising that you also experience other symptoms.

If you think you're experiencing other symptoms, you can talk to your doctor about this to make sure you're getting the right treatment.