Overview - Depression in adults Depression is more than simply feeling unhappy or fed up for a few days. Most people go through periods of feeling down, but when you're depressed you feel persistently sad for weeks or months, rather than just a few days. Some people think depression is trivial and not a genuine health condition. They're wrong – it is a real illness with real symptoms. Depression is not a sign of weakness or something you can "snap out of" by "pulling yourself together". The good news is that with the right treatment and support, most people with depression can make a full recovery. These pages are about depression in adults. Read about depression in children and young people . How to tell if you have depression Depression affects people in different ways and can cause a wide variety of symptoms. They range from lasting feelings of unhappiness and hopelessness, to losing interest in the things you used to enjoy and feeling very tearful. Many people with depression also have symptoms of anxiety . There can be physical symptoms too, such as feeling constantly tired, sleeping badly, having no appetite or sex drive, and various aches and pains. The symptoms of depression range from mild to severe. At its mildest, you may simply feel persistently low in spirit, while severe depression can make you feel suicidal, that life is no longer worth living. Most people experience feelings of stress, anxiety or low mood during difficult times. A low mood may improve after a short period of time, rather than being a sign of depression. When to see a doctor It's important to seek help from a GP if you think you may be depressed. Many people wait a long time before seeking help for depression, but it's best not to delay. The sooner you see a doctor, the sooner you can be on the way to recovery. What causes depression? Sometimes there's a trigger for depression. Life-changing events, such as bereavement, losing your job or giving birth, can bring it on. People with a family history of depression are more likely to experience it themselves. But you can also become depressed for no obvious reason. Read more about the causes of depression Treating depression Treatment for depression can involve a combination of lifestyle changes, talking therapies and medicine. Your recommended treatment will be based on how severe your depression is. If you have mild depression, your doctor may suggest waiting to see whether it improves on its own, while monitoring your progress. This is known as "watchful waiting". They may also suggest lifestyle measures such as exercise and guided self-help. Talking therapies, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) , may also be used for mild depression. For moderate to severe depression, a combination of talking therapy and antidepressants is often recommended. If you have severe depression, you may be referred to a specialist mental health team for intensive specialist talking treatments and prescribed medicine. Living with depression Many people with depression benefit by making lifestyle changes, such as getting more exercise , cutting down on alcohol , giving up smoking and eating healthily . Reading a self-help book or joining a support group are also worthwhile. They can help you gain a better understanding about what causes you to feel depressed. Sharing your experiences with others in a similar situation can also be very supportive. Information: Social care and support guide If you: need help with day-to-day living because of illness or disability care for someone regularly because they're ill or disabled, or because of their age – including family members Our social care and support guide explains your options and where you can get support. Video: clinical depression - Lawrence's story In this video, Lawrence talks about his experience of clinical depression. Media last reviewed: 1 June 2021 Media review due: 1 June 2024 More in Depression in adults Overview - Depression in adults Symptoms - Depression in adults Causes - Depression in adults Diagnosis - Depression in adults Treatment - Depression in adults Living with - Depression in adults Support groups - Depression in adults Page last reviewed: 5 July 2023 Next review due: 5 July 2026

Depression Depression is a low mood that can last a long time or keep returning, affecting your everyday life. Top tasks in Depression Get urgent help now for mental health Symptoms of depression Read about low mood, sadness and depression Types of depression Read about the different types of depression, such as depression in adults, psychotic depression and depression after giving birth. Coping with depression Read about how to cope with depression yourself, or how to help someone else. Improving low mood Read about self-help techniques that could help you improve your low mood. Related information Bereavement Raising low self-esteem

Symptoms - Depression in adults The symptoms of depression can be complex and vary widely between people. If you're depressed, you may feel sad, hopeless and lose interest in things you used to enjoy. The symptoms persist for weeks or months and are bad enough to interfere with your work, social life and family life. There are many other symptoms of depression and you're unlikely to have all of those listed on this page. Psychological symptoms The psychological symptoms of depression include: continuous low mood or sadness feeling hopeless and helpless having low self-esteem feeling tearful feeling guilt-ridden feeling irritable and intolerant of others having no motivation or interest in things finding it difficult to make decisions not getting any enjoyment out of life feeling anxious or worried having suicidal thoughts or thoughts of harming yourself Physical symptoms The physical symptoms of depression include: moving or speaking more slowly than usual changes in appetite or weight (usually decreased, but sometimes increased) constipation unexplained aches and pains lack of energy low sex drive ( loss of libido ) disturbed sleep – for example, finding it difficult to fall asleep at night or waking up very early in the morning Social symptoms The social symptoms of depression include: avoiding contact with friends and taking part in fewer social activities neglecting your hobbies and interests having difficulties in your home, work or family life Severities of depression Depression can often come on gradually, so it can be difficult to notice something is wrong. Many people try to cope with their symptoms without realising they're unwell. It can sometimes take a friend or family member to suggest something is wrong. Doctors describe depression in adults as either less severe (mild) or more severe (moderate or severe), based on: the symptoms, including how often you get symptoms and how bad they are how long depression lasts the impact on your daily life A few people with severe depression may have symptoms of psychosis . You'll usually be asked to answer a set of questions to help doctors assess how severe your condition is. Grief and depression It can be difficult to distinguish between grief and depression. They share many of the same characteristics, but there are important differences between them. Grief is an entirely natural response to a loss, while depression is an illness. People who are grieving may have symptoms of depression, but they usually improve with time. For some people, bereavement can lead to depression. If you're grieving it's normal to have feelings of sadness. Some other symptoms of depression are rare with grief and bereavement, such as having suicidal thoughts, symptoms of psychosis and feeling hopeless or guilt-ridden. Read more about coping with grief after bereavement or loss Other types of depression There are different types of depression, and some conditions where depression may be one of the symptoms. These include: postnatal depression – sometimes new mothers, fathers or partners develop depression after they have a baby; this is known as postnatal depression and it's treated in a similar way to other types of depression, with talking therapies and antidepressant medicines bipolar disorder – also known as "manic depression", in bipolar disorder there are spells of both depression and excessively high mood (mania); the depression symptoms are similar to depression, but the bouts of mania can include harmful behaviour, such as gambling, going on spending sprees and having unsafe sex seasonal affective disorder (SAD) – also known as "winter depression", SAD is a type of depression with a seasonal pattern usually related to winter premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD) – a severe type of premenstrual syndrome (PMS) where you have symptoms including feelings of depression and anxiety in the weeks before your period Read more about diagnosing depression When to seek help See a GP if you experience symptoms of depression for most of the day, every day, for more than 2 weeks. A low mood may improve after a short time. Read more about low mood, sadness and depression More in Depression in adults Overview - Depression in adults Symptoms - Depression in adults Causes - Depression in adults Diagnosis - Depression in adults Treatment - Depression in adults Living with - Depression in adults Support groups - Depression in adults Page last reviewed: 5 July 2023 Next review due: 5 July 2026